# Documentation

## Install and configure

* [[!traillink download text="download and install"]] the tools
* special documentation for people [[!traillink on_mac]]
* configure the [[!traillink vim]] text editor

## Developing with Nit

### Learning the language

The [[!traillink manual]] describe the specification of the language.

The [[!traillink FAQ]] contains some cook-book recipes and answers to some other frequent questions.

You can also look at some [[examples of programs|examples]] written in Nit.

### Nit Compiler and Other Tools

The [[tools]] page documents the compiler and the other tools of Nit.

There is also a [[plugin for eclipse|eclipse]] and a [[bundle for vim|vim]].

A Debugger is being developed and can be used with the Interpreter (nit.nit). See the [[debugger|debugger]] page for informations on how to use it.

### Standard Library 

The <a href="stdlib">standard library</a> references built-ins and standard classes.

### Foreign Function Interfaces (FFI)

[[!traillink native_interface]]

[[!traillink "FFI Overview"]] summarizes the foreign languages supported by Nit and their implemented features.

[[!traillink "FFI with C"]] describes the interface between Nit and C. Which allows to implement Nit methods directly in C code, and more.

There's also a guide to develop Nit [[!traillink "wrapping C libraries" text="wrappers for existing C libraries"]] to access their features through normal Nit modules.

[[!traillink "FFI with Java"]] describes the interface with Java.

[[!traillink "Nit on Android"]] gives some guide lines on how to develop for Android in Nit.

## For Contributors

The page [[!traillink internal text="Get Involved"]] includes documentations and other resources.

## For Scientists

For more details about Nit theoretical foundations, see [[publications and technical reports|research]].
