# Project Meta-data

* Status: proposal
* Discussion: https://github.com/nitlang/nit/issues/1655
* Implementation:
  * Association between a project and its .ini file https://github.com/nitlang/nit/pull/1654
  * Filling metadata: work in progress
  * Using metadata: work in progress
* Preview: http://nitlanguage.org/catalog/index.html

In Nit, the *project* is the unit of distribution and versioning of software.
A project is made of coherent modules that are developed and should be used together.

Nit tools need information to associate a module to its projects and be able to look for dependencies inter-projects.
These information are given in a project description file, called `project.ini` located in the root directory of the project.

An example of a `project.ini` file is

~~~ini
[project]
name=foo
version=0.1
tags=lib,datastructure,android
author=John Doe <doe@example.com> (http://example.com/~doe)
license=GPL
[source]
include=src
[upstream]
homepage=http://example.com/foo
git=https://git.example.com/doe/foo.git
~~~

## project

The project section describe core information about the project, as listed in a catalog of projects

### project.name

The name of the project, should be a valid identifier.

By default, it is the name of the root directory.

### project.version

The version number of the project.
Free-style for the moment but will be used latter with a semantic versioning approach <http://semver.org/>

By default it is the empty string

### project.tags

Comma-separated list of tags used to categorize the project.
Tools like auto-documentation and archive networks may use them to classify the project.

By default it is the empty list

Some tags:

* ai: artificial intelligence
* algo: data structure and algorithms
* cli: command line interface
* crypto: cryptography
* database: database
* debug: debugging, profiling, testing, logging
* devel: development and software engineering
* educ: education
* embedded: embedded system
* encoding: encoding, decoding, conversion
* example: example of code, proof of concepts
* format: read, write and manipulation of file formats
* game: video games
* graphics: graphics and display
* i18n: internationalization and localization
* io: input-output
* java: Java related
* language: related to other programming language
* lib: library and frameworks
* network: networking
* parallelism: parallelism, threads, clusters
* platform: special platforms
* sound: sound, audio, music
* terminal: terminal, console
* text: manipulation of text
* ui: user interface
* web: web, http
* wrapper: wrapping of third-party software
* xml: manipulation of XML

### project.maintainer

List of the persons that are responsible for the project.

By default it is the empty list

Note that there is no `author` field.

### project.more_contributors

List of additionnal contributors.

The final list of contributors is computed and include the maitainers, authors collected by the vcs (`git shortlog`) and persons.
This field is expected to hold contributors thal falled trought the cracks of the vcs (e.g. non programmer contributors, bad csv history, etc.)

By default it is the empty list

### project.license

The main license of the software.
Free-style, feel free to use the identifier of license listed by SPDX <https://spdx.org/licenses>

By default it is the empty string

## source

The source section describe files in the directory of the project

### source.include

The list of directories to scan to find Nit source files.
Paths are relative to the root directory of the project.

By default it is "."

### source.exclude

The list of directories excluded from the scan of files for the project.

Unless specific conditions, there is no reason to set it.

By default, it is the empty list

### source.bin

Where executable are compiled if any.

By default, it is "`bin/`"

### source.assets

For libraries `mnit` and `app.nit`, the directory contained assets.
On some platform like `android` it is used to locate and bundle assets in the generated `.apk` files

By default, it is "`assets/`"

### sources.po

The directory containing translation files used by the module `gettext`.

By default, it is "`po/`"

## upstream

The section `upstream` groups information about accessing resources about the software and its development on the Internet

### upstream.git

An URL to the git repository of the project

By default it is the empty string

### upstream.git.branch

The git branch of the project

By default is is `master`

### upstream.git.directory

The subdirectory of the repository that is the root directory of the project.

While it is expected that each project is developed in its own repository, a project could be located is a subdirectory. 

By default is is `.`

### upstream.homepage

The URL of the public homepage of the project

By default it is the empty string

### upstream.contact

Which person, mailing list, forum, to send e-mail messages in the first place.

By default it is the email of the first author (see `project.autor`)

### upstream.issues

A URL to the list of known bugs and issues for the project.

### upstream.browse

An URL to browse the repository containing the sources.
